how to document functions and macros (#17926)
openssl/openssl: doc/HOWTO/documenting-macros.md

    include/openssl/bio.h: macro BIO_get_dgram_origin(3) undocumented
    include/openssl/bio.h: macro BIO_set_dgram_dest(3) undocumented
    include/openssl/bio.h: macro BIO_get_dgram_dest(3) undocumented
~~~~

and you'll want to document this.

So, create a new .pod file in doc/man3/FUNCTION.pod.

You might be documenting several related functions in that file, but don't try to think about giving it a neutral name.  Just use the name of the first function as the file name, so in this case I called it:

    doc/man3/BIO_set_dgram_origin.pod

if you do use an unrelated name (like BIO_dgram.pod) then you'll get a warning about that.

Then, you'll notice that your new file is not in test/build.info.
That file is created by running:

    make generate_doc_buildinfo

this will update doc/build.info.  You should git add the result as `generate_doc_buildinfo` is not
run on every build.

With these two changes, running `make doc-nits` locally should now agree with you that you have documented all your new defines, but it might then complain:

````
    BIO_get_dgram_dest(3) is supposedly internal (maybe missing from other.syms) but is documented as public
````

> If it is the case that your interface is meant to public, then you need to edit the file `util/other.syms` to add the names of your `#define` functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it is the case that your interface is meant to be public, then you need to edit the file `util/other.syms` to add the names of your `#define` functions.
```

Documenting Macros
==================

> "make doc-nits" (or the check-docs Action) might tell you something like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `make doc-nits` command (or the `check-docs` action) might tell you something like:
```

Reviewer 2: No problem. Here it comes again  :-)
```suggestion
The `make doc-nits` command (or the `check-docs` action) might tell you something like:

> ~~~~text

Reviewer 2: I wasn't aware until today that you can also use [tilde characters instead of backticks](https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/#fenced-code-blocks) for fencing code blocks. However, since backticks are advertised way to do it in GitHub Markdown and since we use them everywhere else, I really would prefer if you would not introduce this new syntax.

Reviewer 2: It also does not make sense to add the `text` language specifier, since it has no effect. Just three ` ``` `, nothing else. Four backticks should only used to fence a text which displays triple backticks, like this:
````
```
BIO_get_dgram_dest(3) is supposedly internal
(maybe missing from other.syms) but is documented as public
```
````
And BTW: would you please be so kind and fix this location as well? Thanks!

Author: ```
./doc/HOWTO/documenting-macros.md:6: MD040 Fenced code blocks should have a language specified
./doc/HOWTO/documenting-macros.md:22: MD040 Fenced code blocks should have a language specified
./doc/HOWTO/documenting-macros.md:32: MD040 Fenced code blocks should have a language specified
./doc/HOWTO/documenting-macros.md:43: MD040 Fenced code blocks should have a language specified
```
So I will put "text" back in.

include/openssl/bio.h: macro BIO_get_dgram_origin(3) undocumented
include/openssl/bio.h: macro BIO_set_dgram_dest(3) undocumented
include/openssl/bio.h: macro BIO_get_dgram_dest(3) undocumented
~~~~

and you'll want to document this.

So, create a new .pod file in doc/man3/FUNCTION.pod.

You might be documenting several related functions in that file,
but don't try to think about giving it a neutral name.
Just use the name of the first function as the file name,
so in this case I called it:

~~~~text
doc/man3/BIO_set_dgram_origin.pod
~~~~

if you do use an unrelated name (like BIO_dgram.pod) then you'll get
a warning about that.

Then, you'll notice that your new file is not in test/build.info.
That file is created by running:

~~~~text
make generate_doc_buildinfo
~~~~

this will update doc/build.info.
You should git add the result as `generate_doc_buildinfo` is not run on every build.

With these two changes, running `make doc-nits` locally should
now agree with you that you have documented all your new defines,
but it might then complain:

````text
BIO_get_dgram_dest(3) is supposedly internal
(maybe missing from other.syms) but is documented as public

> ````

Reviewer 2: Four backticks should only be used to fence a text which displays triple backticks, like this:
````
```
BIO_get_dgram_dest(3) is supposedly internal
(maybe missing from other.syms) but is documented as public
```
````

Author: With tilde, the language is required by the nit-checker, but I've changed it all to three backtick.

Author: make doc-nits on my laptop did not complain about language missing, but the CI did. Sigh.

Reviewer 2: > > With tilde, the language is required by the nit-checker, but I've changed it all to three backtick.
> 
> Curious... I don't think that any of the available specs give reason for that distinction.

The requirement for adding a „text“ specifier is complete ridiculous imo and I heavily dislike it.  It has no benefit (syntax highlighting), it just violates the principle that the markup should be least disruptive to the reader of the raw text document. We have tons of markdown documentation which use four space indentation (my preferred method, because it’s not disruptive at all) or just triple backquotes (second best), and no nit checker has ever complained.

Was this check added recently? If yes, it ought to be removed.

Reviewer 3: We did not allow fenced code blocks before. I'd agree that requiring the specifier is nonsense, could @mcr just add the MD040 as exclude_rule in https://github.com/openssl/openssl/blob/master/util/markdownlint.rb

If it is the case that your interface is meant to be public, then you need
to edit the file `util/other.syms` to add the names of your `#define` functions.
This file is probably intended to be sorted alphabetically,

> but there are some out of order things, but put your item in the right place,

Reviewer: [Compound modifiers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compound_modifier) within the [noun phrase](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noun_phrase) are typically hyphenated, as in [out-of-order execution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Out-of-order_execution) and [out-of-order delivery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Out-of-order_delivery).
```suggestion
but there are some out-of-order things, but put your item in the right place,
```

Reviewer 2: @Lin2Jing4 I‘m impressed with your grammatical skills.  I wouldn’t have been able to name the technical terms! 😅

> Documenting Macros
> ==================
> 
> The `make doc-nits` command (or the `check-docs` action) might tell
> you something like:

Reviewer 2: Since it is actually much more common that new public functions are added than public macros, it would be great if you wouldn't restrict yourself to the case of macros only, but explain both cases together in a single HOWTO `documenting-functions-and-macros.md`. The process is essentially the same, with only minor differences.

You could also add a short intro with a rationale, like:

> Documenting public Functions and Macros
> =======================================

> In the last years, the OpenSSL project has strived to improve the quality
> and coverage of the API documentation. A while ago, this goal has been
> turned into an official [documentation-policy]. This policy is actively
> enforced by the `make doc-nits` target resp. `check-docs GitHub action.

[documentation-policy]: https://www.openssl.org/policies/technical/documentation-policy.html

> If you add a new public function or macro to a header file without documenting
> it, it give you an error message like this:

```suggestion
Documenting public Functions and Macros
=======================================

In the last years, the OpenSSL project has strived to improve the quality
and coverage of the API documentation. A while ago, this goal has been
turned into an official [documentation-policy]. This policy is actively
enforced by the `make doc-nits` target resp. `check-docs GitHub action.

[documentation-policy]: https://www.openssl.org/policies/technical/documentation-policy.html

If you add a new public function or macro to a header file without documenting
it, it give you an error message like this:
```

```text
include/openssl/bio.h: macro BIO_set_dgram_origin(3) undocumented
include/openssl/bio.h: macro BIO_get_dgram_origin(3) undocumented
include/openssl/bio.h: macro BIO_set_dgram_dest(3) undocumented
include/openssl/bio.h: macro BIO_get_dgram_dest(3) undocumented
```

and you'll want to document this.

So, create a new .pod file in doc/man3/FUNCTION.pod.

You might be documenting several related functions in that file,
but don't try to think about giving it a neutral name.
Just use the name of the first function as the file name,
so in this case I called it:

```text
doc/man3/BIO_set_dgram_origin.pod
```

> if you do use an unrelated name (like BIO_dgram.pod) then you'll get

Author: ```suggestion
If you do use an unrelated name (like BIO_dgram.pod) then you'll get
```

a warning about that.

> Then, you'll notice that your new file is not in test/build.info.
> That file is created by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, you need to add your new file to the `test/build.info` file.
You can do this by running:
```

```shell
make generate_doc_buildinfo
```

this will update doc/build.info.
You should git add the result as `generate_doc_buildinfo` is not run on every build.

With these two changes, running `make doc-nits` locally should
now agree with you that you have documented all your new defines,
but it might then complain:

```text
BIO_get_dgram_dest(3) is supposedly internal
(maybe missing from other.syms) but is documented as public
```

If it is the case that your interface is meant to be public, then you need

> to edit the file `util/other.syms` to add the names of your `#define` functions.

Reviewer 3: If something is in include/openssl it is public by definition. So this sentence is misleading. And yeah, the warning from make doc-nits is misleading too.

Internal interfaces are in the other include directories and they are documented in doc/internal.

Author: I can't really know any of this.  If you have changes to suggest please make them.

Reviewer 2: @mcr your sentence is indeed misleading, but I believe that the main reason why you are a bit confused about @t8m's change request is because you only know half of the story: 

Any new public symbol (i.e. a symbol which appears in a public header file) needs to be documented. Most of the times, this public symbol will be a public API function, in rare cases it can be a function-like macro, as in your case. 

Adding public functions is much more common than adding public macros, which explains the why the latter are stored in a file called `util/other.syms`.  More interesting are the files  `util/libcrypto.num` and  `util/libssl.num`, this is where all the public functions are stored. You don't edit those files manually, there is a make target to update them for you.

Before long, I will post a short explanation about the differences between adding a new public function and new public macro, which will hopefully make things more clear to you and enable you to complete your howto.

> This file is probably intended to be sorted alphabetically,

Reviewer 3: It is sorted alphabetically on a new major release. Otherwise the new items should be put at the end.

Author: So the advice is to just put things at the end, even though it looks like they could be inserted alphabetically.
Why not just ask people to insert things alphabetically?

Reviewer 3: Because it is then clear which macros were added later in the subsequent minor releases. In the end it does not matter much where you put the identifier though in case of the other.syms file, but when the same is being done for regular functions in libcrypto.num and libssl.num, it is more obvious that the newly added functions are put at the end.
